README.md, before:

# Bills

Easily divide up bills within a group, so people don't have to pay for stuff they didn't get.

## Format

Comments start with `#` and continue until the end of the line. Empty lines are ignored.

Each line is an entry, containing the following elements separated by arbitrary whitespace:

  * *creditor*: who paid for something (see `Shares`)
  * *debtors*: who benefited from this (see `Shares`)
  * *amount*: how much was paid, as a decimal.

### Shares

Sometimes, multiple people spend money, and/or the money is spent for multiple people, and not necessarily at identical rates.
For this, shares can be specified.
A share is either:
 - A person (e.g. `A` or `Bob`, starting with exactly one uppercase letter and continuing with any number of lowercase letters)
 - A group of people (optinally weighted, optionally comma separated) (e.g. `AB`, `A,B`, `AliceBob`, `Alice,Bob`)

Groups can be weighted to by parenthesizing them: `1(AB)2(BC)`. The amount will first be distributed to groups according to group weight, and then inside the groups according to the weights inside the parentheses.

Some examples:


 - `A`, `Bob`: a single share for one person
 - `1A2B`, `3A,Bob,2C`: simple shares for multiple people (default is one share, so Bob gets a sixth of that item)
 - `50A50B`: half and half, for those who like to think in percentages (note: the software will not check that they actually sum to 100)
 - `(AB)(CDE)`: quarters for each of A and B, and sixths for each of C, D and E
 - `3(1A,2B)(DE)`: quarter for A, half for B, and eight for D and E each
 - `7(3(AB)5(3D7E))(8F1(3G1H))`  you're insane

### Defines

The `%define` and `%undefine` syntax can be used to re-define person names.
This has two main uses (though other, more creative uses, are of course possible):
 - Creating "groups" by defining a new Person, e.g. `%define E ABCD` and then using the shorthand `E` for items shared equally by those four parties. Groups can be any weighted expression, as described above.
 - Having others pay for a specific person's expenses, e.g. `%define X AB` for `A` and `B` to share all expenses `X` incurs. This is nice when you want to "treat" someone to something, and foot their bill.

Defines will remain in effect until they are removed by an `%undefine` line, and are applied both for creditors and debitors.

### Exclusions

With group-style defines, especially with large groups, it may be convenient to exclude certain members of the group for specific entries, without having to redefine the entire (possible complex) group structure.
This can be achieved with exclusion syntax, e.g. `ABCD\A`, which is equivalent to `ABC`.
The `\\` operator binds less tightly than union, but respects parentheses, e.g. `(AB)C\D` is the same as `ABC\D`, and `ABC\(AB\A)` equals `AC`.
Exclusion disregards weights, and will remove all shares on the left side for any person on the right side, e.g. `5A3B2C6D\1A2B` is equal to `2C6D`.

## Building

```
ghc bills.hs -o bills
```

## Usage

```
bills < example.txt
```

## Algorithm

The algorithm track a "wallet" for each person : Whenever they pay something, subtract the amount; whenever they receive something, add it.
When `A` pays 1.00 to `B` and `C`, `A` will have 1.00 subtracted, and `B` and `C` will have 0.50 added (because they received that value, e.g. in the form of goods).

Once all transactions are tracked, people with positive balances (who got more than they gave) pay out to people with negative balances, until all balances are zero.

## Example

### Input

```
# Bill 1: Mom-&-Pop Store, 1970-01-01
A	BC	2.00	# A paid 2.00, benefiting B and C
A	A	5.00	# A paid 5.00, but only for themselves
A	ABC	10.00	# A paid 10.00, and whatever was bought got split evenly.

# Bill 2: Hot Dog Stand, 1970-01-02
B	A	2.00
B	AB	3.00

# Cash exchange
C	B	8.88	# C gave B some cash

# Bill 3: Tickets, Stadium, 1970-01-05
A,B		AB,2C		# A and B each paid half of the tickets, which included one for each of them and 2 for C
```

### Output

```
C pays 16.166666 to A
C pays 1.2866666 to B
```

## Wishlist

 - Different modes besides "settlements"
 	- Transactions per person ("X got #.## from Y", "X paid #.## for Z")
 	- Total amounts paid/received ("X paid ###.## and received ###.# in total")
 	- Statistics
 	- Charts and Diagrams (dot/graphviz, tikz, R)
 - Alias system, possibly scoped (e.g. if couples share an account)

## Copyright/MIT License

This software can be found at https://github.com/tobyp/bills. It is licensed under the terms of the MIT license, which can be found in the LICENSE file.

Commit message:

Document Currencies and add Sublime Text syntax definition support

README.md, after:

# Bills

Easily divide up bills within a group, so people don't have to pay for stuff they didn't get.

## Format

Comments start with `#` and continue until the end of the line. Empty lines are ignored.

Each line is an entry, containing the following elements separated by arbitrary whitespace:

  * *creditor*: who paid for something (see `Shares`)
  * *debtors*: who benefited from this (see `Shares`)
  * *amount*: how much was paid, as a decimal.

### Shares

Sometimes, multiple people spend money, and/or the money is spent for multiple people, and not necessarily at identical rates.
For this, shares can be specified.
A share is either:
 - A person (e.g. `A` or `Bob`, starting with exactly one uppercase letter and continuing with any number of lowercase letters)
 - A group of people (optinally weighted, optionally comma separated) (e.g. `AB`, `A,B`, `AliceBob`, `Alice,Bob`)

Groups can be weighted to by parenthesizing them: `1(AB)2(BC)`. The amount will first be distributed to groups according to group weight, and then inside the groups according to the weights inside the parentheses.

Some examples:


 - `A`, `Bob`: a single share for one person
 - `1A2B`, `3A,Bob,2C`: simple shares for multiple people (default is one share, so Bob gets a sixth of that item)
 - `50A50B`: half and half, for those who like to think in percentages (note: the software will not check that they actually sum to 100)
 - `(AB)(CDE)`: quarters for each of A and B, and sixths for each of C, D and E
 - `3(1A,2B)(DE)`: quarter for A, half for B, and eight for D and E each
 - `7(3(AB)5(3D7E))(8F1(3G1H))`  you're insane

### Defines

The `%define` and `%undefine` syntax can be used to re-define person names.
This has two main uses (though other, more creative uses, are of course possible):
 - Creating "groups" by defining a new Person, e.g. `%define E ABCD` and then using the shorthand `E` for items shared equally by those four parties. Groups can be any weighted expression, as described above.
 - Having others pay for a specific person's expenses, e.g. `%define X AB` for `A` and `B` to share all expenses `X` incurs. This is nice when you want to "treat" someone to something, and foot their bill.

Defines will remain in effect until they are removed by an `%undefine` line, and are applied both for creditors and debitors.

### Currencies

Amounts of money can be specified with an optional currency (without a currency code, the active currency is assumed, which defaults to the standin currency code `XXX`).
New currencies can be defined using the command `%exchange ABC 1.23`, which defines that one unit of the currency ABC (`1.00 ABC`) is worth 1.23 units of the default currency (`1.23 XXX`).
An amount specified as `567.89 ABC` will therefore be converted to `698.5047 XXX`.

When no currency is specified, the active currency is used, which defaults to `XXX`.
The default currency can be changed to ABC by the `%currency ABC` directive.

If working with the `XXX` currency confuses you, add a `%exchange ABC 1.00` directive to make ABC be exactly equivalent to XXX and then think of that as your default currency.

### Exclusions

With group-style defines, especially with large groups, it may be convenient to exclude certain members of the group for specific entries, without having to redefine the entire (possible complex) group structure.
This can be achieved with exclusion syntax, e.g. `ABCD\A`, which is equivalent to `ABC`.
The `\\` operator binds less tightly than union, but respects parentheses, e.g. `(AB)C\D` is the same as `ABC\D`, and `ABC\(AB\A)` equals `AC`.
Exclusion disregards weights, and will remove all shares on the left side for any person on the right side, e.g. `5A3B2C6D\1A2B` is equal to `2C6D`.

## Building

```
ghc bills.hs -o bills
```

## Usage

```
bills < example.txt
```

## Algorithm

The algorithm track a "wallet" for each person : Whenever they pay something, subtract the amount; whenever they receive something, add it.
When `A` pays 1.00 to `B` and `C`, `A` will have 1.00 subtracted, and `B` and `C` will have 0.50 added (because they received that value, e.g. in the form of goods).

Once all transactions are tracked, people with positive balances (who got more than they gave) pay out to people with negative balances, until all balances are zero.

## Example

### Input

```
# Bill 1: Mom-&-Pop Store, 1970-01-01
A	BC	2.00	# A paid 2.00, benefiting B and C
A	A	5.00	# A paid 5.00, but only for themselves
A	ABC	10.00	# A paid 10.00, and whatever was bought got split evenly.

# Bill 2: Hot Dog Stand, 1970-01-02
B	A	2.00
B	AB	3.00

# Cash exchange
C	B	8.88	# C gave B some cash

# Bill 3: Tickets, Stadium, 1970-01-05
A,B		AB,2C		# A and B each paid half of the tickets, which included one for each of them and 2 for C
```

### Output

```
C pays 16.166666 to A
C pays 1.2866666 to B
```

## Wishlist

 - Different modes besides "settlements"
 	- Transactions per person ("X got #.## from Y", "X paid #.## for Z")
 	- Total amounts paid/received ("X paid ###.## and received ###.# in total")
 	- Statistics
 	- Charts and Diagrams (dot/graphviz, tikz, R)
 - Alias system, possibly scoped (e.g. if couples share an account)

## Copyright/MIT License

This software can be found at https://github.com/tobyp/bills. It is licensed under the terms of the MIT license, which can be found in the LICENSE file.
